README.md, before:

Software Heritage - CVS loader
==============================

The Software Heritage CVS Loader imports the history of CVS repositories
into the SWH dataset.

The main entry points are

- :class:`swh.loader.cvs.loader.CvsLoader` for the main cvs loader which ingests content out of
  a local cvs repository


Features
--------
The CVS loader can access CVS repositories via rsync or via the CVS
pserver protocol, with optional support for tunnelling pserver via SSH.

The CVS loader does _not_ require the cvs program to be installed.

Access via rsync requires the rsync program to be installed.
The CVS loader will then invoke rsync to obtain a temporary local copy of the
entire CVS repository. It will then walk the local copy the CVS repository and
parse history of each RCS file with a built-in RCS parser.
This will usually be the fastest method for importing a given CVS repository.
However, most CVS servers do not offer repository access via rsync, and CVS
repositories which see active commits may see conversion problems because the
CVS repository format was not designed for lock-less read access.

Access via the plaintext CVS pserver protocol requires no external dependencies
to be installed, and is compatible with regular CVS servers. This method will
use read-locks on the server side and should therefore be safe to use with
active CVS repositories.
The CVS loader will use a built-in minimal CVS client written in Python to fetch
the output of the cvs rlog command executed on the CVS server. This output will
be processed to obtain repository history information. All versions of all files
will then be fetched from the server and injected into the SWH archive.

Access via pserver over SSH requires OpenSSH to be installed. Apart from
using SSH as a transport layer the conversion process is the same as in
the plaintext pserver case. The SSH client will be instructed to trust SSH host key
fingeprints upon first use. If a CVS server changes its SSH fingerprint then manual
intervention may be required in order for future visits to be successful.

Regardless of access protocol, the CVS loader uses heuristics to convert the
per-file history stored in CVS into changesets. These changesets correspond to
snapshots in the SWH database model. A given CVS repository should always yield
a consistent series of changesets across multiple visits.

The following URL protocol schemes are recognized by the loader:

- rsync://
- pserver://
- ssh://

After the protocol scheme, the CVS server hostname must be specified,
with an optional user:password field delimited from the hostname
with the '@' character:

```
pserver://anonymous:password@cvs.example.com/
```

After the hostname, the server-side CVS root path must be specified.
The path will usually contain a CVSROOT directory on the server, though
this directory may be hidden from clients:

```
pserver://anonymous:password@cvs.example.com/var/cvs/
```

The final component of the URL identifies the name of the CVS module
which should be ingested into the SWH archive:

```
pserver://anonymous:password@cvs.example.com/var/cvs/project1
```

As a concrete example, this URL points to the historical CVS repository
of the a2ps project. In this case, the cvsroot path is /sources/a2ps and
the CVS module of the project is called a2ps:

```
pserver://anonymous:anonymous@cvs.savannah.gnu.org/sources/a2ps/a2ps
```

In order to obtain the history of this repository the CVS loader will
perform the CVS pserver protocol exchange which is also performed by:

```
cvs -d :pserver:anonymous@cvs.savannah.gnu.org/sources/a2ps rlog a2ps
```

Known Limitations
-----------------
CVS repositories which see active commits should be converted with care.
It is possible to end up with a partial conversion of the latest commit
if repository data is fetched via rsync while a commit is in progress.
The pserver protocol is the safer option in such cases.

Only history of main CVS branch is converted.
CVS vendor branch imports and merges which modify the main branch are
modeled as two distinct commits to the main branch.
Other branches will not be represented in the conversion result at all.

CVS labels are not converted into corresponding SWH tags/releases yet.

The converter does not yet support incremental fetching of CVS history.
The entire history will be fetched and processed during every visit.
By design, CVS does not fully support a concept of changesets that span multiple
files and, as such, importing an evolving CVS history incrementally is a not a
trivial problem. Regardless, some improvements could be made relatively easily,
as noted below.

CVS repositories copied with rsync could be cached locally, such that
rsync will only download RCS files which have changed since the last visit.
At present the local copy of the repository is fetched to a temporary directory
and is deleted once the conversion process is done.

It might help to store persistent meta-data about blobs imported from CVS.
If such meta-data could be searched via a given CVS repository name, a path,
and an RCS revision number then redundant downloads of file versions over
the pserver protocol could be detected and skipped.

The minimal CVS client does not yet support the optional gzip extension
offered by the CVS pserver protocol. If this was supported then files
downloaded from a CVS server could be compressed while in transit.

The built-in minimal CVS client has not been tested against many versions of CVS.
It should work fine against CVS 1.11 and 1.12 servers. More work may be needed
to improve compatibility with older versions of CVS.

Acknowledgements
----------------
This software contains code derived from *cvs2gitdump* written by YASUOKA Masahiko
and from the *rcsparse* library written by Simon Schubert.

Licensing information
---------------------
Parts of the software written by SWH developers are licensed under GPLv3.
See the file LICENSE

cvs2gitdump by YASUOKA Masahiko is licensed under ISC.
See the top of the file swh/loader/cvs/cvs2gitdump/cvs2gitdump.py

rcsparse by Simon Schubert is licensed under AGPLv3.
See the file swh/loader/cvs/rcsparse/COPYRIGHT

# Running Tests

Because the rcsparse library is implemented in C and accessed via Python bindings,
the CVS loader must be compiled and installed before tests can be run and the
*build* directory must be passed as an argument to pytest:

```
$ ./setup.py build install
$ pytest ./build
```

# CLI run

With the configuration:

/tmp/loader_cvs.yml:
```
storage:
  cls: remote
  args:
    url: http://localhost:5002/
```

Run:

```
swh loader --config-file /tmp/loader_cvs.yml \
    run cvs <cvs-url>
```

Commit message:

acknowledge code derived from ViewVC in our README file

README.md, after:

Software Heritage - CVS loader
==============================

The Software Heritage CVS Loader imports the history of CVS repositories
into the SWH dataset.

The main entry points are

- :class:`swh.loader.cvs.loader.CvsLoader` for the main cvs loader which ingests content out of
  a local cvs repository


Features
--------
The CVS loader can access CVS repositories via rsync or via the CVS
pserver protocol, with optional support for tunnelling pserver via SSH.

The CVS loader does _not_ require the cvs program to be installed.

Access via rsync requires the rsync program to be installed.
The CVS loader will then invoke rsync to obtain a temporary local copy of the
entire CVS repository. It will then walk the local copy the CVS repository and
parse history of each RCS file with a built-in RCS parser.
This will usually be the fastest method for importing a given CVS repository.
However, most CVS servers do not offer repository access via rsync, and CVS
repositories which see active commits may see conversion problems because the
CVS repository format was not designed for lock-less read access.

Access via the plaintext CVS pserver protocol requires no external dependencies
to be installed, and is compatible with regular CVS servers. This method will
use read-locks on the server side and should therefore be safe to use with
active CVS repositories.
The CVS loader will use a built-in minimal CVS client written in Python to fetch
the output of the cvs rlog command executed on the CVS server. This output will
be processed to obtain repository history information. All versions of all files
will then be fetched from the server and injected into the SWH archive.

Access via pserver over SSH requires OpenSSH to be installed. Apart from
using SSH as a transport layer the conversion process is the same as in
the plaintext pserver case. The SSH client will be instructed to trust SSH host key
fingeprints upon first use. If a CVS server changes its SSH fingerprint then manual
intervention may be required in order for future visits to be successful.

Regardless of access protocol, the CVS loader uses heuristics to convert the
per-file history stored in CVS into changesets. These changesets correspond to
snapshots in the SWH database model. A given CVS repository should always yield
a consistent series of changesets across multiple visits.

The following URL protocol schemes are recognized by the loader:

- rsync://
- pserver://
- ssh://

After the protocol scheme, the CVS server hostname must be specified,
with an optional user:password field delimited from the hostname
with the '@' character:

```
pserver://anonymous:password@cvs.example.com/
```

After the hostname, the server-side CVS root path must be specified.
The path will usually contain a CVSROOT directory on the server, though
this directory may be hidden from clients:

```
pserver://anonymous:password@cvs.example.com/var/cvs/
```

The final component of the URL identifies the name of the CVS module
which should be ingested into the SWH archive:

```
pserver://anonymous:password@cvs.example.com/var/cvs/project1
```

As a concrete example, this URL points to the historical CVS repository
of the a2ps project. In this case, the cvsroot path is /sources/a2ps and
the CVS module of the project is called a2ps:

```
pserver://anonymous:anonymous@cvs.savannah.gnu.org/sources/a2ps/a2ps
```

In order to obtain the history of this repository the CVS loader will
perform the CVS pserver protocol exchange which is also performed by:

```
cvs -d :pserver:anonymous@cvs.savannah.gnu.org/sources/a2ps rlog a2ps
```

Known Limitations
-----------------
CVS repositories which see active commits should be converted with care.
It is possible to end up with a partial conversion of the latest commit
if repository data is fetched via rsync while a commit is in progress.
The pserver protocol is the safer option in such cases.

Only history of main CVS branch is converted.
CVS vendor branch imports and merges which modify the main branch are
modeled as two distinct commits to the main branch.
Other branches will not be represented in the conversion result at all.

CVS labels are not converted into corresponding SWH tags/releases yet.

The converter does not yet support incremental fetching of CVS history.
The entire history will be fetched and processed during every visit.
By design, CVS does not fully support a concept of changesets that span multiple
files and, as such, importing an evolving CVS history incrementally is a not a
trivial problem. Regardless, some improvements could be made relatively easily,
as noted below.

CVS repositories copied with rsync could be cached locally, such that
rsync will only download RCS files which have changed since the last visit.
At present the local copy of the repository is fetched to a temporary directory
and is deleted once the conversion process is done.

It might help to store persistent meta-data about blobs imported from CVS.
If such meta-data could be searched via a given CVS repository name, a path,
and an RCS revision number then redundant downloads of file versions over
the pserver protocol could be detected and skipped.

The minimal CVS client does not yet support the optional gzip extension
offered by the CVS pserver protocol. If this was supported then files
downloaded from a CVS server could be compressed while in transit.

The built-in minimal CVS client has not been tested against many versions of CVS.
It should work fine against CVS 1.11 and 1.12 servers. More work may be needed
to improve compatibility with older versions of CVS.

Acknowledgements
----------------
This software contains code derived from *cvs2gitdump* written by YASUOKA Masahiko,
and from the *rcsparse* library written by Simon Schubert.

This software contains code derived from ViewVC: https://www.viewvc.org/

Licensing information
---------------------
Parts of the software written by SWH developers are licensed under GPLv3.
See the file LICENSE

cvs2gitdump by YASUOKA Masahiko is licensed under ISC.
See the top of the file swh/loader/cvs/cvs2gitdump/cvs2gitdump.py

rcsparse by Simon Schubert is licensed under AGPLv3.
See the file swh/loader/cvs/rcsparse/COPYRIGHT

ViewVC is licensed under the 2-clause BSD licence.
See the file swh/loader/cvs/rlog.py

# Running Tests

Because the rcsparse library is implemented in C and accessed via Python bindings,
the CVS loader must be compiled and installed before tests can be run and the
*build* directory must be passed as an argument to pytest:

```
$ ./setup.py build install
$ pytest ./build
```

# CLI run

With the configuration:

/tmp/loader_cvs.yml:
```
storage:
  cls: remote
  args:
    url: http://localhost:5002/
```

Run:

```
swh loader --config-file /tmp/loader_cvs.yml \
    run cvs <cvs-url>
```
